Study 2: Characterize adaptations to unilateral Phase-Dependent Speed Variation and conventional split-belt treadmill in healthy subjects.
==========================================================================================================================================

Introduction
------------

More than 9 million adults in the United States have had a stroke, with
approximately 900,000 new survivors of stroke each year, resulting in
annual costs exceeding \$50 billion (Tsao et al. 2023). Stroke is the
largest cause of severe and complex disability, which often includes
difficulty walking(Adamson, Beswick, and Ebrahim 2004). A hallmark of
post-stroke gait is asymmetric step length, which is associated with
asymmetrical force production and stroke severity(Balasubramanian et al.
2007). Split Belt Treadmill (SBT) training, which uses side-by-side
belts moving at different speeds, induces spontaneous changes in step
length and gait mechanics without explicit feedback(Reisman, Block, and
Bastian 2005; Reisman et al. 2007). For individuals with post-stroke
hemiparesis, repeated SBT training improves step-length symmetry and
enhances walking speed (Reisman et al. 2013; Betschart, McFadyen, and
Nadeau 2018). This project introduces an innovative SBT protocol
variation that may evoke novel biomechanical adaptations, potentially
improving upon the benefits of conventional SBT (cSBT) training.

### **cSBT Training Mechanism**

In cSBT training for post-stroke gait asymmetry, the shorter-step side
is assigned to the faster belt(Reisman, Block, and Bastian 2005; Reisman
et al. 2007). This initially exaggerates asymmetry but evokes
feed-forward changes that gradually restore baseline asymmetry(Reisman,
Block, and Bastian 2005; Reisman et al. 2007), provided individuals have
intact cerebellar function(Morton and Bastian 2006). When belt speeds
are subsequently equalized, a temporary overcorrection towards symmetry
occurs (Post Adaptation), foreshadowing potential long-term improvements
with repeated practice(Reisman et al. 2013; Betschart, McFadyen, and
Nadeau 2018). As individuals with hemiparesis can present with longer
paretic steps or longer non-paretic steps(Balasubramanian et al. 2007),
the fast-belt assignment varies. The Step Length Ratio (SLR), defined as
$\frac{\text{paretic\ step\ length}}{\text{non\ paretic\ step\ length}}$,
thus guides cSBT training.

### **cSBT Training Limitation**

cSBT training induces Post Adaptation reductions in ankle plantarflexor
(PF) torque on the fast side and increases on the slow side, in both
healthy and post-stroke subjects(Lauziare et al. 2014). These PF torque
changes correlate with contralateral step length alterations, affecting
the SLR. Given that hemiparetic gait typically features reduced paretic
PF torque(Allen, Kautz, and Neptune 2011), and PF torque is crucial for
forward propulsion(Neptune, Kautz, and Zajac 2001; Liu et al. 2006;
Hsiao et al. 2015), this effect may have negative implications for
individuals with a Longer Non-Paretic Steps (LNPS)(Lauziare et al.
2014). *Normalizing SLR via cSBT may inadvertently amplify paretic side
joint deficits*. Here we propose a novel approach to alter SLR
therapeutically without compromising PF torque.

### **Phase-Dependent Speed Variation (PDSV)**

We postulate that the cSBT task can be decomposed into two distinct
perturbations, each inducing unique adaptations:

![](uni_media/media/image1.png){width="3.827777777777778in"
height="2.4270833333333335in"}**"FastBrake"** (stepping onto a faster
belt): The leading limb generates braking force while pushed posteriorly
at a faster speed toward the slower trailing limb. This change in
relative foot position increases the subsequent slow-side step length.
The adaptation decreases slow-side step length, correlating with
decreased fast-side PF torque (Lauziare et al. 2014) (Figure 1a).

**"FastProp"** (stepping off a faster belt): The trailing limb generates
propulsive force while pulled away from the slower leading limb. This
changes the relative foot position, decreasing the subsequent fast-side
step length. The adaptation increases fast-side step length. As this
perturbation occurs in late stance when plantarflexors primarily
contribute to ipsilateral swing(Neptune, Kautz, and Zajac 2001) (Figure
1b), we predict an increase in ipsilateral (fast-side) PF torque.

To isolate these perturbations, we propose Phase Dependent Speed
Variation (PDSV), which alters belt speed in synchronization with the
gait cycle. Using real-time vertical Ground Reaction Force (GRF)
monitoring, the belt speed is modulated between fast and slow on the
target side based on two GRF triggers: when the target limb enters swing
(vertical GRF â†’ 0) and when it begins to bear more vertical GRF than the
contralateral limb.

Specifically, in FastBrake, the left belt accelerates to 2 m/s during
left swing. At left initial contact, there is a disparity between belt
speeds that forces the left foot toward the right foot. When the left
foot bears 50% of the total vertical GRF, the belt begins to slow to 1
m/s. The 1 m/s speed is reached by the time the right foot makes initial
contact so that the feet are not pushed together during right-leading
double support.

In contrast, in FastProp, the left belt slows to 1 m/s during left
swing. At left initial contact, the two belt speeds are equal. When the
left limb begins bearing 50% of the total vertical GRF, the left belt
begins to accelerate to 2 m/s as the right limb enters swing. When the
right foot makes contact with the right belt traveling at 1 m/s, the
left belt is traveling at 2 m/s and the left foot is dragged away from
the right foot.

This approach produces belt speed profiles show in Figure 2.

![A graph of a diagram Description automatically generated with medium
confidence](uni_media/media/image2.png){width="4.648148512685914in"
height="2.866854768153981in"}

Figure 2: Belt speed across stance phase by condition as recorded by
markers on belts. During double support the leading limb is in early
stance and the trailing limb is in late stance. Disparities in belt
speed between leading and trailing limbs during double support will
cause the feet to be pushed together or pulled apart.

Isolating these perturbations may allow for selective application of the
most clinically relevant intervention. For individuals with longer
non-paretic steps, applying only FastProp to the paretic side could
increase paretic step length without reducing paretic PF torque.
Alternatively, for those with longer paretic steps, administering only
FastBrake to the non-paretic side could increase non-paretic step
length, improving asymmetry with a briefer, potentially less disruptive
gait perturbation.

**Methods**
-----------

### **Participants**

We will recruit 20 healthy adults (18-45 years) from central Texas.
Inclusion criteria: ability to walk unassisted for 20 minutes. Exclusion
criteria: pregnancy, lower extremity orthopedic, neurological, vascular,
or metabolic conditions affecting gait.

### **Data Collection**

We will use a 10-camera Vicon Nexus motion capture system (100 Hz) and
an instrumented split-belt treadmill with handrails (Motek Medical, 1000
Hz). Participants will wear a safety harness, and a 7-segment lower body
marker set. Static and dynamic calibration trials will be performed,
including functional calibration of hip and knee joints using \"hula
hoop\" and \"quarter squat\" movements (Schwartz and Rozumalski 2005).

### **Protocol**

Participants will complete trials for three conditions in a randomized
order (cSBT, FastBrake, FastProp) as outlined in Table 1. These will be
randomized along with two additional conditions as outlined in Study 3.

Table 1: Randomly ordered trials in Study 2 (Study 3 Trials in faded
font)

  **Randomly Ordered Trials**                          
  ----------------------------- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Study**                     **Condition**          **Description**
  2                             cSBT                   Left belt at 1 m/s and right belt at 2 m/s
  2                             Unilateral FastBrake   Left belt runs 2 m/s at left foot contact, then slows to 1 m/s beginning after weight shift is 50% complete
  2                             Unilateral FastProp    Left belt runs 1 m/s at left foot contact, then increases to 2 m/s beginning after weight shift is 50% complete
  3                             Bilateral FastBrake    Belts run 2 m/s at foot contact, then slow to 1 m/s beginning after weight shift is 50% complete
  3                             Bilateral FastProp     Belts runs 1 m/s at foot contact, then increase to 2 m/s beginning after weight shift is 50% complete

Each trial consists of 3 minutes baseline walking (1 m/s), 6 minutes
perturbed walking, and 3 minutes post-adaptation (Figure 3). This
protocol structure aligns with previous research demonstrating
detectable changes in PF torque following Adaptation(Lauziare et al.
2014). We employ a 2:1 speed ratio. This can be largely adapted to
within approximately 25 strides (Reisman, Block, and Bastian 2005).
Given typical stride times are less than 1.5 seconds each(Wang et al.
2019) , our 6-minute adaptation period should allow ample time for full
adaptation, with 3 minutes sufficient for subsequent washout.

![A blue and red lines on a black background Description automatically
generated](uni_media/media/image3.png){width="4.736111111111111in"
height="3.0277777777777777in"}

Figure 3: Structure of each trial and indicators of where measurements
occur for each Period (Late Baseline, Early Adaptation, Late Adaptation,
Early Post Adaptation)

Participants will wear a safety harness and receive verbal countdowns
before speed changes. Ground reaction forces will be recorded, and
D-Flow software (v3.20.0) will control belt speeds based on vertical
GRF. Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) will be collected using a Borg
RPE 10-point scale (Borg et al. 2010) during the final minute of
Baseline and Adaptation. 60-second recordings will capture late baseline
(30 s)/early adaptation (30 s) and late adaptation (30 s)/early
post-adaptation (30 s) transitions. Handrails will be available if
needed, though participants will be asked to avoid their use unless
necessary to preserve balance.

### **Split Belt Control Mechanism**

For PDSV trials, custom D-Flow scripts will trigger left belt speed
changes based on force plate data: at left swing initiation when GRF
goes to zero and then when the left vertical GRF exceeds the right
vertical GRF. The baseline speed is 1 m/s, and the fast speed is 2 m/s,
with transitions limited by the M-Gait\'s maximum belt acceleration of 3
m/s^2^.

### **Rationale for Target Belt Speeds**

Healthy individuals walking at â‰¥1 m/s have a swing time of \~0.33
seconds (Wang et al. 2019), allowing a 1 m/s speed change between double
support phases. This allows for a roughly even distribution of fast and
baseline speeds across the braking and propulsive phases of stance (see
Figure 2). The 2:1 speed ratio (1 m/s slow, 2 m/s fast) is
well-tolerated in healthy individuals(Reisman, Block, and Bastian 2005)
and elicits detectable after-effects in ankle joint torque(Lauziare et
al. 2014).

### **Data Processing**

Visual3D (HAS Motion, Kingston, Ontario) software will perform data
filtering and biomechanical calculations. Marker trajectories and GRF
will be smoothed using second-order Butterworth low-pass filters at 6
Hz. Center of Pressure data will be smoothed using second-order
Butterworth filters at 4 Hz. This lower frequency filter removes an
oscillatory artifact in the treadmill's COP data that is present during
early stance across all trials, including baseline walking. With this
filtering, progression of COP across the foot aligns with typical
patterns of progression(Chiu, Wu, and Chang 2013). Joint centers will be
defined by malleoli markers (ankle) and functional calibration methods
(hip and knee)(Schwartz and Rozumalski 2005).

Joint torques will be normalized to body weight. Joint torque profiles
across stance phase will be time-normalized and averaged across five
steps to characterize torque in each Period (Figure 4). PF impulse will
calculated by summing across the time-normalized joint torque profile
when there is a net PF moment, and then multiplying by the mean stance
time.

![A graph of a number of different colored lines Description
automatically generated with medium
confidence](uni_media/media/image4.png){width="4.402311898512686in"
height="2.7166404199475065in"}

Figure 4: Joint torques normalized to body weight across stance phase.
These curves are the average of 5 stance phases. Negative values
represent a net plantarflexor moment.

Actual belt velocity will be calculated using reflective markers affixed
to the belts and custom Python scripts within Vicon. Onset and
completion of the Adaptation period will be identified by this belt
velocity. Primary Variables for Late Baseline and Early Post Adaptation
will be characterized by averaging the last 5 complete steps of Baseline
and first 5 complete steps of Post Adaptation, respectively. An average
of 5 steps before and after alterations in belt speed successfully
identified step length symmetry and PF torque changes from Baseline to
Post Adaptation in previous research(Lauziare et al. 2014). Secondary
variables for Early and Late Adaptation will be similarly calculated.

### Primary Variables

**Step Length Ratio** (SLR) defined as
$\frac{left\ (fast)\ step\ length}{right\ (baseline)\ step\ length}$
where step length is the distance between heel markers at initial
contact of the leading limb

**Left (fast side) ankle PF impulse** during stance. PF Impulse will be
normalized to body weight.

Primary variables will be examined for Late Baseline and Early Post
Adaptation

### Secondary Variables

Dominant lower limb will be assessed by asking "If you were to kick a
soccer ball into a goal, which foot would you kick with?"(van Melick et
al. 2017). RPE will be assessed in the final minute of each baseline and
adaptation period.

Lower extremity joint torques will be calculated for all four periods
(Late Baseline, Early Adaptation, Late Adaptation, Early Post
Adaptation).

### Hypotheses 

(H1) *SLR*: Main effect for Period, with increases in SLR from Baseline
to Post Adaptation across all conditions, indicating PDSV can alter SLR
in a similar direction as cSBT.

![](uni_media/media/image5.png){width="4.8805555555555555in"
height="2.859027777777778in"}(H2) *Fast Side PF Impulse*: Main and
interaction effects for Condition and Period on left (fast) side PF
impulse. Comparing Late Baseline and Early Adaptation, cSBT and
FastBrake will decrease PF Impulse, while FastProp will increase it.

A graphical depiction of the expected outcomes on primary variables is
shown in Figure 5. Preliminary results for SLR can be found in Figure 6B
(comparing Baseline to Post Adaptation) and preliminary results
associated with Altered side PF impulse can be found in Figure 8.

These findings would suggest that FastProp may be able to improve SLR in
individuals with a LNPS, while also increasing paretic PF impulse.
Additionally, FastBrake may be able to evoke similar adaptations as a
cSBT while perturbing a smaller portion of the gait cycle and
potentially being easier to tolerate.

### Statistical Analysis

*Hypothesis Testing*

To assess the effects of the different split-belt treadmill protocols on
primary variables, we will employ a linear mixed-effects model. Step
Length Ratio (SLR) and Left (altered side) PF impulse will be analyzed
across Periods (Baseline and Post-Adaptation) and Conditions (cSBT,
FastBrake, and FastProp). The model will include fixed effects for
Period and Condition as well as their interaction. A random intercept
for Participant will be included to account for within-subject
variability.

Pairwise comparisons of periods within each condition will be used to
assess specific intervention, applying Holm\'s correction for multiple
comparisons.

All analyses will be performed in R, using the lme4 package for
mixed-effects modeling and the emmeans package for post-hoc comparisons.
Statistical significance will be set at Î± = 0.05 for all tests.

*Assessing Potential Confounds*

To assess potential order effects and carryover effects, we will use a
mixed-effects model with condition order and previous condition as fixed
effects and participant as a random effect. This analysis will be
performed on the primary outcome measures (SLR and PF impulse).

If significant order effects or carryover effects are detected, we will
adjust our primary analysis strategy to include condition order and/or
previous condition as a fixed effect.

*Alternative Outcomes*

If expected changes are not observed, we will examine differences in
gait parameters during late adaptation to potentially explain variations
in post-adaptation step symmetry and PF impulse. Potential compensatory
mechanisms include (a) increased cadence to avoid peak FastProp times
and (b) increased hip flexor torque to substitute for PF torque in
facilitating limb swing.

Additionally, participant specific factors will be examined that may
differentiate individuals who respond in an unexpected manner, pointing
toward protocol improvements. For example, shorter-legged individuals
may experience difficulty with the speed settings suggesting that a more
individualized set of parameters should be used.

Preliminary Results
-------------------

Data has been collected and analyzed for 5 subjects.

### Step Length Ratio

Preliminary testing of PDSV largely aligns with the expected impact on
SLR (Figure 6 and Table 2). Across all three conditions, the step-length
ratio begins with symmetry. Immediately upon initiation of the
perturbation, the ratio shifts below one, indicating that the fast
(altered) side step length reduces. This asymmetry diminishes as the
participant adapts across six minutes of sustained perturbation. Upon
removal of the perturbation and return to matched belt speeds, there is
an overcorrection in the opposite direction of the early adaptation
asymmetry.

![A graph and diagram of a line Description automatically generated with
medium confidence](uni_media/media/image6.png){width="6.5in"
height="2.45in"}

Figure 6: A) The typical shifting of step length ratio in a conventional
split belt task (symmetry, perturbation, correction, over-correction) B)
Preliminary data replicates this for the conventional split belt
condition; Phase Dependent Speed Variation produces similar patterns of
adaptation.

Table : Step Length Ratio across conditions and periods.

  **Step Length Ratio Across Periods by Condition^\*^**                                                                      
  ------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  Â                                                        **Conventional Split Belt Treadmill**   **Unilateral FastBrake**   **Unilateral FastProp**
  Baseline                                                1.00 (.02)                              .99 (.06)                  .97 (.05)
  Early Adaptation                                        .66 (.07)                               .78 (.15)                  .76 (.24)
  Late Adaptation                                         .94 (.12)                               .88 (.06)                  .94 (.08)
  Early Post Adaptation                                   1.49 (.47)                              1.32 (.28)                 1.26 (.21)
  \* mean (sd)                                                                                                               

### PF Torque Profiles

In our initial subjects, we are largely able to replicate the joint
torque profiles observed by Lauziare et al (2016) following the
conventional split belt task (Figure 7). The FastBrake condition appears
to parallel the cSBT in the suppression of altered side plantarflexor
torque. The FastProp condition appears to exhibit in increase in PF
torque, particularly during mid stance.

![A graph of a graph of a graph Description automatically generated with
medium
confidence](uni_media/media/image7.png){width="6.256944444444445in"
height="4.147899168853893in"}

Figure 7: A) Ankle joint torque profiles across all subjects as observed
by Lauziare et al (2014). Dotted lines are from late baseline and solid
lines are from early post adaptation. B) Results for initial subjects
across all 3 conditions.

### PF Impulse

![](uni_media/media/image8.png){width="3.704861111111111in"
height="2.2868055555555555in"}Preliminary results from the first 5
participants are supportive of H2 (Figure 8). PF Impulse decreases
following adaptation to cSBT and the Unilateral FastBrake. In contrast,
it increases in the FastProp condition.

Figure 8: Left (fast side) PF Impulse

Power Analysis
--------------

Given the planned statistical analysis via linear mixed effects models,
power analysis was performed employing Monte Carlo simulation
techniques(Landau and Stahl 2013) within R. Data was simulated based on
estimates derived from the mean and standard deviations of the 5
preliminary participants (Table 3). Random samples of varying sizes were
drawn from this simulated data and analyzed via the planned statistical
methods. 500 simulations were performed across a range of sample sizes
to determine the smallest sample for which at least 80% of simulations
resulted in successful statistical outcomes.

Table 3: Assumptions used for power analysis in study 2

  **Assumptions for Simulating Variables for Power Analysis**                                                                                          
  ------------------------------------------------------------- ------ ------------------------------ --------------------------------- -------------- ---------------------
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                       ***Step Length Ratio (H1)***   ***Fast Side PF Impulse (H2)***                  
                                                                       **Baseline**                   **Post Adaptation**               **Baseline**   **Post Adaptation**
  cSBT                                                          mean   1.00                           1.49                              0.40           0.32
                                                                sd     0.05                           0.32                              0.04           0.04
  FastBrake                                                     mean   1.00                           1.31                              0.40           0.30
                                                                sd     0.05                           0.32                              0.04           0.04
  FastProp                                                      mean   1.00                           1.26                              0.40           0.44
                                                                sd     0.05                           0.32                              0.04           0.04

14 and 17 participants are required to achieve 80% power for (H1) and
(H2), respectively. 20 participants will be included to provide an
additional margin of safety.

Discussion
----------

A conventional split belt treadmill (cSBT) creates two abnormal periods
of double support: stepping onto a faster belt and stepping off of a
faster belt. Phase Dependent Speed Variation (PDSV) is an attempt to
decompose the cSBT task into two distinct perturbations that impose only
one altered period of double support or the other.

The objective of this study is to identify the short-term adaptations to
these distinct perturbations. We hypothesize that kinematic alterations
such as the Step Length Ratio will be altered in a similar way to cSBT
but that distinct kinetic adaptations will occur given the perturbations
occur at distinct points in the gait cycle. The preliminary results from
5 participants are supportive of these hypotheses, and the observed
effects suggests that significant statistical results can be achieved
with a modest sample size (\~20).

Changes in motor behavior observed following adaptation to a split belt
treadmill walking are likely mediated by underlying cerebellar
adaptations(Morton and Bastian 2006).

The FastProp version of PDSV may provide a way to induce spontaneous
cerebellar-mediated increases in paretic plantarflexor torque while
increasing relative step length on the paretic side. This approach could
be particularly beneficial for those who have experienced a cortical
stroke and take a longer step on the non-paretic side. Although this
presentation is less common(Balasubramanian et al. 2007; Allen, Kautz,
and Neptune 2011), PDSV may offer these individuals a more customized
intervention compared to a cSBT that evokes short-term decreases in
paretic plantarflexor torque.

For individuals in the more common grouping who take a longer step on
the paretic side, the FastBrake version of PDSV may induce changes in
step symmetry and ankle torque that are similar to a cSBT without
injecting as large of a perturbation into the gait cycle. This may make
training with PDSV FastProp more tolerable than a cSBT while evoking a
similar therapeutic response.

### Limitations

The study examines short-term effects in a healthy population, which may
not directly map to a clinical post-stroke population.

Bibliography
============

Adamson, Joy, Andy Beswick, and Shah Ebrahim. 2004. "Is Stroke the Most
Common Cause of Disability?" *Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular
Diseases* 13 (4): 171--77.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2004.06.003.Allen,
Jessica L., Steven A. Kautz, and Richard R. Neptune. 2011. "Step Length
Asymmetry Is Representative of Compensatory Mechanisms Used in
Post-Stroke Hemiparetic Walking." *Gait & Posture* 33 (4): 538--43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2011.01.004.Balasubramanian,
Chitralakshmi K., Mark G. Bowden, Richard R. Neptune, and Steven A.
Kautz. 2007. "Relationship between Step Length Asymmetry and Walking
Performance in Subjects with Chronic Hemiparesis." *Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation* 88 (1): 43--49.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2006.10.004.Bergen, Gwen, Mark R.
Stevens, and Elizabeth R. Burns. 2016. "Falls and Fall Injuries Among
Adults Aged â‰¥65 Years --- United States, 2014." *MMWR. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report* 65 (37): 993--98.
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6537a2.Betschart, Martina, Bradford J.
McFadyen, and Sylvie Nadeau. 2018. "Repeated Split-Belt Treadmill
Walking Improved Gait Ability in Individuals with Chronic Stroke: A
Pilot Study." *Physiotherapy Theory and Practice* 34 (2): 81--90.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2017.1375055.Borg, E., G. Borg, K.
Larsson, M. Letzter, and B.-M. Sundblad. 2010. "An Index for
Breathlessness and Leg Fatigue: An Index for Breathlessness and Leg
Fatigue." *Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports* 20 (4):
644--50. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2009.00985.x.Chiu, Min-Chi,
Hsin-Chieh Wu, and Li-Yu Chang. 2013. "Gait Speed and Gender Effects on
Center of Pressure Progression during Normal Walking." *Gait & Posture*
37 (1): 43--48.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.05.030.Delabastita, Tijs, Enzo
Hollville, Andreas Catteau, Philip Cortvriendt, Friedl De Groote, and
Benedicte Vanwanseele. 2021. "Distal-to-Proximal Joint Mechanics
Redistribution Is a Main Contributor to Reduced Walking Economy in Older
Adults." *Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports* 31 (5):
1036--47. https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.13929.DeVita, Paul, and Tibor
Hortobagyi. 2000. "Age Causes a Redistribution of Joint Torques and
Powers during Gait." *Journal of Applied Physiology* 88 (5): 1804--11.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.2000.88.5.1804.Hardy, Susan E., Subashan
Perera, Yazan F. Roumani, Julie M. Chandler, and Stephanie A. Studenski.
2007. "Improvement in Usual Gait Speed Predicts Better Survival in Older
Adults." *Journal of the American Geriatrics Society* 55 (11): 1727--34.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01413.x.Hsiao, HaoYuan, Brian
A. Knarr, Jill S. Higginson, and Stuart A. Binder-Macleod. 2015. "The
Relative Contribution of Ankle Moment and Trailing Limb Angle to
Propulsive Force during Gait." *Human Movement Science* 39
(February):212--21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2014.11.008.Kerrigan, D. C., M. K. Todd,
U. Della Croce, L. A. Lipsitz, and J. J. Collins. 1998. "Biomechanical
Gait Alterations Independent of Speed in the Healthy Elderly: Evidence
for Specific Limiting Impairments." *Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation* 79 (3): 317--22.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0003-9993(98)90013-2.Landau, Sabine, and Daniel
Stahl. 2013. "Sample Size and Power Calculations for Medical Studies by
Simulation When Closed Form Expressions Are Not Available." *Statistical
Methods in Medical Research* 22 (3): 324--45.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280212439578.Lauziare, S, C MiÃƒÂ©ville, M
Betschart, C Duclos, R Aissaoui, and S Nadeau. 2014. "Plantarflexion
Moment Is a Contributor to Step Length After-Effect Following Walking on
a Split-Belt Treadmill in Individuals with Stroke and Healthy
Individuals." *Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine* 46 (9): 849--57.
https://doi.org/10.2340/16501977-1845.Liu, May Q., Frank C. Anderson,
Marcus G. Pandy, and Scott L. Delp. 2006. "Muscles That Support the Body
Also Modulate Forward Progression during Walking." *Journal of
Biomechanics* 39 (14): 2623--30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.08.017.Melick, Nicky van, Bart
M. Meddeler, Thomas J. Hoogeboom, Maria W. G. Nijhuis-van der Sanden,
and Robert E. H. van Cingel. 2017. "How to Determine Leg Dominance: The
Agreement between Self-Reported and Observed Performance in Healthy
Adults." *PLoS ONE* 12 (12): e0189876.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0189876.Morton, Susanne M., and Amy
J. Bastian. 2006. "Cerebellar Contributions to Locomotor Adaptations
during Splitbelt Treadmill Walking." *The Journal of Neuroscience* 26
(36): 9107--16. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2622-06.2006.Nagasaki,
H., H. Itoh, K. Hashizume, T. Furuna, H. Maruyama, and T. Kinugasa.
1996. "Walking Patterns and Finger Rhythm of Older Adults." *Perceptual
and Motor Skills* 82 (2): 435--47.
https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1996.82.2.435.Neptune, R.R., S.A. Kautz, and
F.E. Zajac. 2001. "Contributions of the Individual Ankle Plantar Flexors
to Support, Forward Progression and Swing Initiation during Walking."
*Journal of Biomechanics* 34 (11): 1387--98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9290(01)00105-1.Reisman, Darcy S., Hannah
J. Block, and Amy J. Bastian. 2005. "Interlimb Coordination During
Locomotion: What Can Be Adapted and Stored?" *Journal of
Neurophysiology* 94 (4): 2403--15.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00089.2005.Reisman, Darcy S., Heather McLean,
Jennifer Keller, Kelly A. Danks, and Amy J. Bastian. 2013. "Repeated
Split-Belt Treadmill Training Improves Poststroke Step Length
Asymmetry." *Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair* 27 (5): 460--68.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1545968312474118.Reisman, Darcy S., Robert
Wityk, Kenneth Silver, and Amy J. Bastian. 2007. "Locomotor Adaptation
on a Split-Belt Treadmill Can Improve Walking Symmetry Post-Stroke."
*Brain: A Journal of Neurology* 130 (Pt 7): 1861--72.
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm035.Schrack, Jennifer A., Eleanor M.
Simonsick, Paulo H.M. Chaves, and Luigi Ferrucci. 2012. "The Role of
Energetic Cost in the Age-Related Slowing of Gait Speed." *Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society* 60 (10): 1811--16.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04153.x.Schwartz, Michael H.,
and Adam Rozumalski. 2005. "A New Method for Estimating Joint Parameters
from Motion Data." *Journal of Biomechanics* 38 (1): 107--16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2004.03.009.Silder, Amy, Bryan
Heiderscheit, and Darryl G. Thelen. 2008. "Active and Passive
Contributions to Joint Kinetics during Walking in Older Adults."
*Journal of Biomechanics* 41 (7): 1520--27.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.02.016.Tsao, Connie W., Aaron W.
Aday, Zaid I. Almarzooq, Cheryl A. M. Anderson, Pankaj Arora, Christy L.
Avery, Carissa M. Baker-Smith, et al. 2023. "Heart Disease and Stroke
Statistics-2023 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association."
*Circulation* 147 (8): e93--621.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001123.Umberger, Brian R., and
Philip E. Martin. 2007. "Mechanical Power and Efficiency of Level
Walking with Different Stride Rates." *Journal of Experimental Biology*
210 (18): 3255--65. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.000950.Wang, Yiji,
Masahiko Mukaino, Kei Ohtsuka, Yohei Otaka, Hiroki Tanikawa, Fumihiro
Matsuda, Kazuhiro Tsuchiyama, Junya Yamada, and Eiichi Saitoh. 2019.
"Gait Characteristics of Post-Stroke Hemiparetic Patients with Different
Walking Speeds." *International Journal of Rehabilitation Research* 43
(December):1. https://doi.org/10.1097/MRR.0000000000000391.
